Update multinode-related content in the architecture section (#230)
timescale/docs.timescale.com-content: introduction/architecture.md

For more on the motivation and design of TimescaleDB, please see our
[technical blog post][chunking].

## Distributed Hypertables (PRIVATE BETA) [](distributed-hypertables)

>:WARNING: Distributed hypertables are currently in PRIVATE BETA.
This feature is not meant for production use. For more information,
please [contact us][contact].

TimescaleDB supports distributing hypertables across multiple nodes
(i.e., a cluster) by leveraging the same hypertable and chunk
primitives as described above. This allows TimescaleDB to scale
inserts and queries beyond the capabilities of a single TimescaleDB
instance.

Distributed hypertables look very similar to regular hypertables, with
the main difference being that chunks are not stored locally. There
are also some features of regular hypertables that distributed
hypertables do not support (see section on current limitations).

### Distributed Databases and Nodes

A distributed hypertable exist in a *distributed database* that
consists of multiple databases stored across one or more TimescaleDB
instances. A database that is part of a distributed database can
assume one of two *node* roles (but not both):

1) Access node
2) Data node

> A client connects to an access node database. It then distributes the requests and queries

Reviewer: The "It" here can refer to either the subject or the object. It looks like it is referring to the client, not the access node.

appropriately to data nodes, and aggregates the results received from the data nodes.
Access nodes store cluster-wide information about the different data nodes as well as how
chunks are distributed across those data nodes. Access nodes can also store non-distributed
hypertables, as well as regular PostgreSQL tables.

Data nodes store data associated with a distribute database (i.e., the

> distributed hypertables within it). Data nodes do not store

Reviewer: Suggestion: "Data nodes store the data of the distributed database." You have already mentioned that a distributed database is a collection of nodes above, so I think this is redundant.

cluster-wide information, and otherwise look just as if they were
stand-alone TimescaleDB instances. Avoid directly accessing local
hypertables or chunks of a distributed hypertable on a data node as
the action can fail or make the distributed hypertable

> inconsistent. There are very few reasons to ever access a data node

Reviewer: Suggestion: "You should not directly access hypertables or chunks on data nodes. Doing so might lead to inconsistent distributed hypertables."

directly, and all access should be done at the access node level.

It is important to note that access nodes and data nodes both run TimescaleDB, and for all intents and
purposes, look just like a single instance of TimescaleDB from an operational perspective.

### Configuring Distributed Hypertables

> With distributed hypertables, we suggest partitioning the hypertables both by space and by time.

Reviewer: Given the description below, I do not think this is a suggestion. It is how you need to partition to actually utilize the distributed nature of the distributed hypertable, so something like "to utilize the full capacity of distributed hypertable, you should partition the hypertable in both the space and time dimension."

For more on the motivation and design of TimescaleDB, please see our
[technical blog post][chunking].

## Distributed Hypertables (PRIVATE BETA) [](distributed-hypertables)

>:WARNING: Distributed hypertables are currently in PRIVATE BETA.
This feature is not meant for production use. For more information,
please [contact us][contact].

TimescaleDB supports distributing hypertables across multiple nodes
(i.e., a cluster) by leveraging the same hypertable and chunk
primitives as described above. This allows TimescaleDB to scale
inserts and queries beyond the capabilities of a single TimescaleDB
instance.

> Distributed hypertables look very similar to regular hypertables, with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Distributed hypertables and regular hypertables look very similar, with
```

> the main difference being that chunks are not stored locally. There

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the main difference being that distributed chunks are not stored locally. There
```

are also some features of regular hypertables that distributed
hypertables do not support (see section on current limitations).

### Distributed Databases and Nodes

> A distributed hypertable exist in a *distributed database* that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A distributed hypertable exists in a *distributed database* that
```

consists of multiple databases stored across one or more TimescaleDB
instances. A database that is part of a distributed database can
assume one of two *node* roles (but not both):

1) Access node

> 2) Data node

Reviewer: Nit: Lists are usually hard to read unless it consists of three items or more, so suggesting "...can be either an *access node* or a *data node*."

Author: I'll keep for now since there before. Think docs probably needs a larger overhaul at some point.

A client connects to an access node database. The access node then
distributes the requests and queries appropriately to data nodes, and
aggregates the results received from the data nodes.  Access nodes
store cluster-wide information about the different data nodes as well
as how chunks are distributed across those data nodes. Access nodes
can also store non-distributed hypertables, as well as regular
PostgreSQL tables.

Data nodes do not store cluster-wide information, and otherwise look
just as if they were stand-alone TimescaleDB instances. You should not
directly access hypertables or chunks on data nodes. Doing so might
lead to inconsistent distributed hypertables.

It is important to note that access nodes and data nodes both run TimescaleDB, and for all intents and

> purposes, look just like a single instance of TimescaleDB from an operational perspective.

Reviewer 2: not sure if this suggestion is technically accurate, but:
```suggestion
purposes, act just like a single instance of TimescaleDB from an operational perspective.
```

### Configuring Distributed Hypertables

To ensure best performance, you should partition a distributed

> hypertable by both time and a space. If you only partition data by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
hypertable by both time and space. If you only partition data by
```

time, that chunk will have to fill up before the access node chooses

> another data node to store the next chunk, and thus during that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
another data node to store the next chunk, so during that
```
